docs/parser-spec.md, before:

# GLP Parser Specification - Arithmetic Expressions

## Overview

This document specifies the parsing of arithmetic expressions in GLP source code. Arithmetic expressions use infix notation in source but are transformed to prefix (structure) notation in the AST for bytecode generation.

## Motivation

**User-facing syntax**: Programmers write natural infix arithmetic:
```prolog
add(X, Y, Z) :- execute('evaluate', [X? + Y?, Z]).
compute(Z) :- execute('evaluate', [(2 + 3) * 4, Z]).
```

**Internal representation**: Parser transforms to prefix structures:
```
+(VarRef(X, isReader:true), VarRef(Y, isReader:true))
*(+(2, 3), 4)
```

This approach keeps the VM simple (no special arithmetic instructions) while providing convenient syntax.

## Arithmetic Expression Syntax

### Grammar

```
expr ::= number                    % integer literal
       | variable                  % writer or reader variable
       | '-' expr                  % unary negation
       | expr '+' expr             % addition
       | expr '-' expr             % subtraction
       | expr '*' expr             % multiplication
       | expr '/' expr             % integer division
       | expr 'mod' expr           % modulo
       | '(' expr ')'              % grouping
```

### Operator Precedence (highest to lowest)

1. **Parentheses**: `()`
2. **Unary negation**: `-` (prefix)
3. **Multiplicative**: `*`, `/`, `mod` (left-associative)
4. **Additive**: `+`, `-` (left-associative)

### Operator Associativity

All binary operators are **left-associative**:
- `X + Y + Z` parses as `(X + Y) + Z`
- `X * Y / Z` parses as `(X * Y) / Z`

## Transformation Rules

### Binary Operators

| Source (Infix)  | AST (Prefix Structure) |
|-----------------|------------------------|
| `X + Y`         | `+(X, Y)`              |
| `X - Y`         | `-(X, Y)`              |
| `X * Y`         | `*(X, Y)`              |
| `X / Y`         | `/(X, Y)`              |
| `X mod Y`       | `mod(X, Y)`            |

### Unary Operator

| Source          | AST (Prefix Structure) |
|-----------------|------------------------|
| `-X`            | `neg(X)`               |

**Note**: Unary `-` uses functor `neg` to avoid ambiguity with binary subtraction.

### Precedence Examples

| Source              | AST (respects precedence)    |
|---------------------|------------------------------|
| `X + Y * Z`         | `+(X, *(Y, Z))`              |
| `(X + Y) * Z`       | `*(+(X, Y), Z)`              |
| `X + Y + Z`         | `+(+(X, Y), Z)`              |
| `X * Y / Z`         | `/(*(X, Y), Z)`              |
| `2 + 3 * 4`         | `+(2, *(3, 4))` = 14         |
| `(2 + 3) * 4`       | `*(+(2, 3), 4)` = 20         |
| `-X + Y`            | `+(neg(X), Y)`               |
| `-(X + Y)`          | `neg(+(X, Y))`               |

### Reader Variables in Expressions

Readers (`X?`) are preserved in the AST:

| Source              | AST                                      |
|---------------------|------------------------------------------|
| `X? + Y?`           | `+(VarRef(X, isReader:true), VarRef(Y, isReader:true))` |
| `X? + 5`            | `+(VarRef(X, isReader:true), ConstTerm(5))` |
| `-X?`               | `neg(VarRef(X, isReader:true))`          |

## Lexer Token Additions

The lexer must recognize these new tokens:

```dart
enum TokenType {
  // ... existing tokens ...

  // Arithmetic operators (NEW)
  PLUS,           // +
  MINUS,          // - (can be binary or unary)
  STAR,           // *
  SLASH,          // /
  MOD,            // mod (keyword)
}
```

### Lexer Changes

1. **Operator tokens**: Add cases for `+`, `*`, `/` in `_scanToken()`
2. **Minus handling**: `-` already handled for negative number literals; add MINUS token for non-numeric context
3. **MOD keyword**: Recognize `mod` as keyword (not atom) during identifier scanning

## Parser Implementation Strategy

### Expression Parsing Algorithm

Use **Pratt parsing** (precedence climbing) for expressions:

1. **Primary expression**: number, variable, `(expr)`, `-expr`
2. **Binary operators**: Handle precedence and associativity
3. **Transform to AST**: Build StructTerm with operator as functor

### Parser Method Additions

```dart
// In Parser class:

/// Parse arithmetic expression with precedence
Term parseExpression([int minPrecedence = 0]) {
  var left = parsePrimary();

  while (current is operator && precedence(current) >= minPrecedence) {
    final op = advance();
    final right = parseExpression(precedence(op) + 1);
    left = StructTerm(op.functor, [left, right]);
  }

  return left;
}

/// Parse primary expression: number | variable | (expr) | -expr
Term parsePrimary() {
  if (match(NUMBER)) return ConstTerm(previous.value);
  if (match(VARIABLE)) return VarTerm(previous.lexeme, isReader: false);
  if (match(READER)) return VarTerm(previous.lexeme, isReader: true);
  if (match(LPAREN)) {
    final expr = parseExpression();
    consume(RPAREN);
    return expr;
  }
  if (match(MINUS)) {
    final operand = parsePrimary();
    return StructTerm('neg', [operand]);
  }
  throw ParseError("Expected expression");
}

/// Operator precedence table
int precedence(Token op) {
  switch (op.type) {
    case TokenType.STAR:
    case TokenType.SLASH:
    case TokenType.MOD:
      return 20;  // multiplicative
    case TokenType.PLUS:
    case TokenType.MINUS:
      return 10;  // additive
    default:
      return 0;
  }
}
```

### Integration with Existing Parser

Arithmetic expressions are parsed in contexts where terms are expected:
- **Execute arguments**: `execute('evaluate', [Expr, Result])`
- **List elements**: `[X + Y, A * B]`
- **Structure arguments**: `foo(X + Y, Z)`

**Detection heuristic**: If we see a term followed by an operator token (`+`, `-`, `*`, `/`, `mod`), enter expression parsing mode.

## Type System

### Supported Types

- **Integers only**: No floating point support in this phase
- **Division**: Integer division (truncates toward zero)
- **Modulo**: Standard modulo operation

### Type Checking

Type checking happens at **runtime** during `evaluate/2` execution:

```dart
// In evaluatePredicate():
final value = _evaluate(runtime, expr, call);
if (value is! int) {
  return SystemResult.failure;  // non-integer operand
}
```

### Three-Valued Semantics

The `evaluate/2` system predicate (called via execute) follows **two-valued semantics** (success/abort):

1. **Success**: All operands bound to numbers → compute result
2. **Abort**: Operand is unbound reader OR non-numeric OR division by zero

**Safe Pattern**: Use guards to ensure preconditions:
```prolog
safe_add(X, Y, Z) :-
  number(X), number(Y) |
  execute('evaluate', [X? + Y?, Z]).
```

## Guard Expressions

Guards are pure tests that check runtime conditions without side effects. They use three-valued semantics (success/suspend/fail) and execute during the HEAD/GUARDS phase before commit.

### Guard Categories

#### Type Guards

Function-call syntax (already working):
- `ground(X)` - test if X contains no unbound variables
- `known(X)` - test if X is bound (not unbound variable)
- `integer(X)` - test if X is integer (planned)
- `number(X)` - test if X is number (planned)
- `writer(X)` - test if X is writer variable (planned)
- `reader(X)` - test if X is reader variable (planned)

#### Comparison Guards

Infix syntax (requires parser extension):
- `X < Y` - less than
- `X =< Y` - less than or equal (Prolog convention, NOT `<=`)
- `X > Y` - greater than
- `X >= Y` - greater than or equal
- `X =:= Y` - arithmetic equality
- `X =\= Y` - arithmetic inequality

#### Unification Guards (planned)

- `X = Y` - unification guard
- `X \= Y` - non-unification guard

#### Control Guards

- `otherwise` - succeeds if all previous clauses failed (not suspended)
- `true` - always succeeds

### Lexer Token Additions for Guards

Add to `token.dart`:

```dart
enum TokenType {
  // ... existing tokens ...

  // Comparison operators (precedence 700, non-associative)
  LESS,           // <
  LESS_EQUAL,     // =< (Prolog convention, not <=)
  GREATER,        // >
  GREATER_EQUAL,  // >=
  ARITH_EQUAL,    // =:=
  ARITH_NOT_EQUAL,// =\=

  // Unification guards (precedence 700)
  UNIFY,          // =
  NOT_UNIFIABLE,  // \=
}
```

**Lexer Implementation**:
```dart
// In Lexer._scanToken():
case '<':
  addToken(_peek() == '=' ? LESS_EQUAL : LESS);
  if (_peek() == '=') _advance();
  break;
case '>':
  addToken(_peek() == '=' ? GREATER_EQUAL : GREATER);
  if (_peek() == '=') _advance();
  break;
case '=':
  if (_peek() == ':' && _peekNext() == '=') {
    _advance(); _advance();
    addToken(ARITH_EQUAL);  // =:=
  } else if (_peek() == '\\' && _peekNext() == '=') {
    _advance(); _advance();
    addToken(ARITH_NOT_EQUAL);  // =\=
  } else {
    addToken(UNIFY);  // =
  }
  break;
case '\\':
  if (_peek() == '=') {
    _advance();
    addToken(NOT_UNIFIABLE);  // \=
  } else {
    error("Unexpected character");
  }
  break;
```

### Operator Precedence (Extended)

```
1200  :- (rule separator)
1100  | (guard separator)
 700  < =< > >= =:= =\= = \= (comparison/test, non-associative)
 500  + - (additive, left-associative)
 400  * / mod (multiplicative, left-associative)
 200  - (unary minus, non-associative)
```

**Key property**: Comparison operators are **non-associative** (expressions like `X < Y < Z` are rejected).

### Parser Extension for Guard Expressions

Update `_parseGoalOrGuard()` to handle infix comparison syntax:

```dart
Goal _parseGoalOrGuard() {
  // Start parsing as term
  final left = _parseTerm();

  // Check for comparison operators
  if (_isComparisonOp(_current)) {
    final op = _advance();
    final right = _parseTerm();

    // Transform infix to prefix: X < Y → <(X, Y)
    return Atom(op.lexeme, [left, right]);
  }

  // Otherwise, it's a regular function-call guard
  return left as Atom;
}

bool _isComparisonOp(Token token) {
  return token.type == TokenType.LESS ||
         token.type == TokenType.LESS_EQUAL ||
         token.type == TokenType.GREATER ||
         token.type == TokenType.GREATER_EQUAL ||
         token.type == TokenType.ARITH_EQUAL ||
         token.type == TokenType.ARITH_NOT_EQUAL ||
         token.type == TokenType.UNIFY ||
         token.type == TokenType.NOT_UNIFIABLE;
}
```

### Transformation Examples

| Source Syntax      | AST Representation       | Guard Predicate |
|--------------------|--------------------------|-----------------|
| `X < Y`            | `Atom('<', [X, Y])`      | `guard_less`    |
| `X =< Y`           | `Atom('=<', [X, Y])`     | `guard_less_equal` |
| `X > Y`            | `Atom('>', [X, Y])`      | `guard_greater` |
| `X >= Y`           | `Atom('>=', [X, Y])`     | `guard_greater_equal` |
| `X =:= Y`          | `Atom('=:=', [X, Y])`    | `guard_arith_equal` |
| `X =\= Y`          | `Atom('=\\=', [X, Y])`   | `guard_arith_not_equal` |
| `X = Y`            | `Atom('=', [X, Y])`      | `guard_unify` |
| `X \= Y`           | `Atom('\\=', [X, Y])`    | `guard_not_unifiable` |

### Guard Examples

**Type Guards** (working):
```prolog
pred(X, Y) :- known(X), ground(Y) | body.
factorial(N, F) :- integer(N) | compute_fact(N?, F).
```

**Comparison Guards** (requires parser extension):
```prolog
% Quicksort with comparison guards
partition(Pivot, [], [], []).
partition(Pivot, [X | Xs?], [X | Smaller], Greater) :-
    X? < Pivot? |
    partition(Pivot?, Xs?, Smaller, Greater).
partition(Pivot, [X | Xs?], Smaller, [X | Greater]) :-
    X? >= Pivot? |
    partition(Pivot?, Xs?, Smaller, Greater).

% Arithmetic equality
equal_results(X, Y) :-
    X? =:= Y? |
    execute('write', ['Results are equal']).
```

**Unification Guards** (planned):
```prolog
% Unification without binding
unifiable(X, Y) :- X = Y | body.  % succeeds if X and Y can unify
different(X, Y) :- X \= Y | body. % succeeds if X and Y cannot unify
```

**Implementation Status**:
- ✅ Parser recognizes guard separator `|` correctly
- ✅ Parses predicates before `|` as `Guard` AST nodes
- ✅ Guard execution infrastructure (AST, codegen, runner) ready
- ⏳ Comparison operator tokens not yet in lexer
- ⏳ Infix syntax in guard position not yet parsed

**Required for Full Guard Support**:
1. Add comparison tokens to `token.dart` (see above)
2. Update lexer to recognize multi-character operators (`=<`, `>=`, `=:=`, `=\=`)
3. Extend `_parseGoalOrGuard()` to handle infix comparison syntax
4. Transform infix to prefix: `X < Y` → `Atom('<', [X, Y])`

### Three-Valued Semantics

Guards return one of three outcomes:
1. **Success**: Condition holds, continue with clause
2. **Suspend**: Unbound reader encountered, add to Si suspension set
3. **Fail**: Condition does not hold, try next clause

**Example**:
```prolog
safe_divide(X, Y, Z) :-
    number(X), number(Y), Y =\= 0 |  % guards ensure preconditions
    execute('evaluate', [X? / Y?, Z]).
```

If `Y` is unbound, the `number(Y)` guard suspends (adds Y's reader to Si).
If `Y` is bound to 0, the `Y =\= 0` guard fails (tries next clause).
If both guards succeed, execute proceeds safely.

## Examples

### Simple Arithmetic

**Source**:
```prolog
add(X, Y, Z) :- execute('evaluate', [X? + Y?, Z]).
```

**AST**:
```dart
Clause(
  head: Atom('add', [VarTerm('X'), VarTerm('Y'), VarTerm('Z')]),
  body: [
    Atom('execute', [
      ConstTerm('evaluate'),
      ListTerm([
        StructTerm('+', [
          VarTerm('X', isReader: true),
          VarTerm('Y', isReader: true)
        ]),
        VarTerm('Z', isReader: false)
      ])
    ])
  ]
)
```

### Complex Expression

**Source**:
```prolog
compute(X, Y, Z) :- execute('evaluate', [(X? + Y?) * 2, Z]).
```

**AST**:
```dart
StructTerm('*', [
  StructTerm('+', [
    VarTerm('X', isReader: true),
    VarTerm('Y', isReader: true)
  ]),
  ConstTerm(2)
])
```

### Unary Negation

**Source**:
```prolog
negate(X, Y) :- execute('evaluate', [-X?, Y]).
```

**AST**:
```dart
StructTerm('neg', [VarTerm('X', isReader: true)])
```

## Error Handling

### Lexer Errors

- **Unexpected character**: If `+`, `-`, `*`, `/` appear in invalid contexts
- **Invalid number**: Malformed numeric literals

### Parser Errors

- **Missing operand**: `X + ` (no right operand)
- **Mismatched parentheses**: `(X + Y`
- **Invalid primary**: `+ + X` (two consecutive operators)

### Runtime Errors

- **Type error**: Operand is non-integer (e.g., `3 + a` where `a` is atom)
- **Division by zero**: `X / 0`
- **Unbound reader**: Suspends goal, not an error

## Implementation Checklist

### Phase 1: Lexer
- [ ] Add PLUS, MINUS, STAR, SLASH tokens
- [ ] Add MOD keyword token
- [ ] Update `_scanToken()` switch statement
- [ ] Handle `-` in numeric vs operator context

### Phase 2: Parser
- [ ] Implement `parseExpression()` with precedence climbing
- [ ] Implement `parsePrimary()` for base cases
- [ ] Add precedence table for operators
- [ ] Integrate with term parsing
- [ ] Transform to prefix StructTerm

### Phase 3: Testing
- [ ] Test simple operations: `X + Y`, `X * Y`
- [ ] Test precedence: `X + Y * Z` = `+(X, *(Y, Z))`
- [ ] Test parentheses: `(X + Y) * Z` = `*(+(X, Y), Z)`
- [ ] Test unary minus: `-X` = `neg(X)`
- [ ] Test with readers: `X? + Y?`
- [ ] Test nested expressions: `(X + Y) * (Z - W)`

### Phase 4: Integration
- [ ] Run REPL test suite with arithmetic programs
- [ ] Verify `evaluate/2` receives correct prefix structures
- [ ] Test three-valued semantics (success/suspend/fail)
- [ ] Verify error messages are clear

## References

- **WAM Paper** (Section 8): Structure building and traversal
- **glp-bytecode-v216-complete.md**: Execute instruction and system predicates
- **Pratt Parsing**: [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operator-precedence_parser#Pratt_parsing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operator-precedence_parser#Pratt_parsing)

## Version History

- **v1.0 (2025-11-12)**: Initial specification for arithmetic expression parsing

Commit message:

docs: Add goal syntax principle - body goals and queries are identical
This clarifies that any term valid as a query must also be valid in
clause bodies. The =.. parser bug violates this principle.

docs/parser-spec.md, after:

# GLP Parser Specification - Arithmetic Expressions

## Goal Syntax Principle

**The syntax of body goals and queries is identical.**

Any term that can appear as a top-level query can also appear as a goal in a clause body, and vice versa. This includes:
- Regular predicate calls: `foo(X, Y)`
- Infix predicates: `X =.. [foo, a, b]`, `X := Y`
- Arithmetic comparisons: `X > Y`, `X =:= Y`

If the parser accepts a term as a query but rejects the same term in a clause body, that is a parser bug.

## Overview

This document specifies the parsing of arithmetic expressions in GLP source code. Arithmetic expressions use infix notation in source but are transformed to prefix (structure) notation in the AST for bytecode generation.

## Motivation

**User-facing syntax**: Programmers write natural infix arithmetic:
```prolog
add(X, Y, Z) :- execute('evaluate', [X? + Y?, Z]).
compute(Z) :- execute('evaluate', [(2 + 3) * 4, Z]).
```

**Internal representation**: Parser transforms to prefix structures:
```
+(VarRef(X, isReader:true), VarRef(Y, isReader:true))
*(+(2, 3), 4)
```

This approach keeps the VM simple (no special arithmetic instructions) while providing convenient syntax.

## Arithmetic Expression Syntax

### Grammar

```
expr ::= number                    % integer literal
       | variable                  % writer or reader variable
       | '-' expr                  % unary negation
       | expr '+' expr             % addition
       | expr '-' expr             % subtraction
       | expr '*' expr             % multiplication
       | expr '/' expr             % integer division
       | expr 'mod' expr           % modulo
       | '(' expr ')'              % grouping
```

### Operator Precedence (highest to lowest)

1. **Parentheses**: `()`
2. **Unary negation**: `-` (prefix)
3. **Multiplicative**: `*`, `/`, `mod` (left-associative)
4. **Additive**: `+`, `-` (left-associative)

### Operator Associativity

All binary operators are **left-associative**:
- `X + Y + Z` parses as `(X + Y) + Z`
- `X * Y / Z` parses as `(X * Y) / Z`

## Transformation Rules

### Binary Operators

| Source (Infix)  | AST (Prefix Structure) |
|-----------------|------------------------|
| `X + Y`         | `+(X, Y)`              |
| `X - Y`         | `-(X, Y)`              |
| `X * Y`         | `*(X, Y)`              |
| `X / Y`         | `/(X, Y)`              |
| `X mod Y`       | `mod(X, Y)`            |

### Unary Operator

| Source          | AST (Prefix Structure) |
|-----------------|------------------------|
| `-X`            | `neg(X)`               |

**Note**: Unary `-` uses functor `neg` to avoid ambiguity with binary subtraction.

### Precedence Examples

| Source              | AST (respects precedence)    |
|---------------------|------------------------------|
| `X + Y * Z`         | `+(X, *(Y, Z))`              |
| `(X + Y) * Z`       | `*(+(X, Y), Z)`              |
| `X + Y + Z`         | `+(+(X, Y), Z)`              |
| `X * Y / Z`         | `/(*(X, Y), Z)`              |
| `2 + 3 * 4`         | `+(2, *(3, 4))` = 14         |
| `(2 + 3) * 4`       | `*(+(2, 3), 4)` = 20         |
| `-X + Y`            | `+(neg(X), Y)`               |
| `-(X + Y)`          | `neg(+(X, Y))`               |

### Reader Variables in Expressions

Readers (`X?`) are preserved in the AST:

| Source              | AST                                      |
|---------------------|------------------------------------------|
| `X? + Y?`           | `+(VarRef(X, isReader:true), VarRef(Y, isReader:true))` |
| `X? + 5`            | `+(VarRef(X, isReader:true), ConstTerm(5))` |
| `-X?`               | `neg(VarRef(X, isReader:true))`          |

## Lexer Token Additions

The lexer must recognize these new tokens:

```dart
enum TokenType {
  // ... existing tokens ...

  // Arithmetic operators (NEW)
  PLUS,           // +
  MINUS,          // - (can be binary or unary)
  STAR,           // *
  SLASH,          // /
  MOD,            // mod (keyword)
}
```

### Lexer Changes

1. **Operator tokens**: Add cases for `+`, `*`, `/` in `_scanToken()`
2. **Minus handling**: `-` already handled for negative number literals; add MINUS token for non-numeric context
3. **MOD keyword**: Recognize `mod` as keyword (not atom) during identifier scanning

## Parser Implementation Strategy

### Expression Parsing Algorithm

Use **Pratt parsing** (precedence climbing) for expressions:

1. **Primary expression**: number, variable, `(expr)`, `-expr`
2. **Binary operators**: Handle precedence and associativity
3. **Transform to AST**: Build StructTerm with operator as functor

### Parser Method Additions

```dart
// In Parser class:

/// Parse arithmetic expression with precedence
Term parseExpression([int minPrecedence = 0]) {
  var left = parsePrimary();

  while (current is operator && precedence(current) >= minPrecedence) {
    final op = advance();
    final right = parseExpression(precedence(op) + 1);
    left = StructTerm(op.functor, [left, right]);
  }

  return left;
}

/// Parse primary expression: number | variable | (expr) | -expr
Term parsePrimary() {
  if (match(NUMBER)) return ConstTerm(previous.value);
  if (match(VARIABLE)) return VarTerm(previous.lexeme, isReader: false);
  if (match(READER)) return VarTerm(previous.lexeme, isReader: true);
  if (match(LPAREN)) {
    final expr = parseExpression();
    consume(RPAREN);
    return expr;
  }
  if (match(MINUS)) {
    final operand = parsePrimary();
    return StructTerm('neg', [operand]);
  }
  throw ParseError("Expected expression");
}

/// Operator precedence table
int precedence(Token op) {
  switch (op.type) {
    case TokenType.STAR:
    case TokenType.SLASH:
    case TokenType.MOD:
      return 20;  // multiplicative
    case TokenType.PLUS:
    case TokenType.MINUS:
      return 10;  // additive
    default:
      return 0;
  }
}
```

### Integration with Existing Parser

Arithmetic expressions are parsed in contexts where terms are expected:
- **Execute arguments**: `execute('evaluate', [Expr, Result])`
- **List elements**: `[X + Y, A * B]`
- **Structure arguments**: `foo(X + Y, Z)`

**Detection heuristic**: If we see a term followed by an operator token (`+`, `-`, `*`, `/`, `mod`), enter expression parsing mode.

## Type System

### Supported Types

- **Integers only**: No floating point support in this phase
- **Division**: Integer division (truncates toward zero)
- **Modulo**: Standard modulo operation

### Type Checking

Type checking happens at **runtime** during `evaluate/2` execution:

```dart
// In evaluatePredicate():
final value = _evaluate(runtime, expr, call);
if (value is! int) {
  return SystemResult.failure;  // non-integer operand
}
```

### Three-Valued Semantics

The `evaluate/2` system predicate (called via execute) follows **two-valued semantics** (success/abort):

1. **Success**: All operands bound to numbers → compute result
2. **Abort**: Operand is unbound reader OR non-numeric OR division by zero

**Safe Pattern**: Use guards to ensure preconditions:
```prolog
safe_add(X, Y, Z) :-
  number(X), number(Y) |
  execute('evaluate', [X? + Y?, Z]).
```

## Guard Expressions

Guards are pure tests that check runtime conditions without side effects. They use three-valued semantics (success/suspend/fail) and execute during the HEAD/GUARDS phase before commit.

### Guard Categories

#### Type Guards

Function-call syntax (already working):
- `ground(X)` - test if X contains no unbound variables
- `known(X)` - test if X is bound (not unbound variable)
- `integer(X)` - test if X is integer (planned)
- `number(X)` - test if X is number (planned)
- `writer(X)` - test if X is writer variable (planned)
- `reader(X)` - test if X is reader variable (planned)

#### Comparison Guards

Infix syntax (requires parser extension):
- `X < Y` - less than
- `X =< Y` - less than or equal (Prolog convention, NOT `<=`)
- `X > Y` - greater than
- `X >= Y` - greater than or equal
- `X =:= Y` - arithmetic equality
- `X =\= Y` - arithmetic inequality

#### Unification Guards (planned)

- `X = Y` - unification guard
- `X \= Y` - non-unification guard

#### Control Guards

- `otherwise` - succeeds if all previous clauses failed (not suspended)
- `true` - always succeeds

### Lexer Token Additions for Guards

Add to `token.dart`:

```dart
enum TokenType {
  // ... existing tokens ...

  // Comparison operators (precedence 700, non-associative)
  LESS,           // <
  LESS_EQUAL,     // =< (Prolog convention, not <=)
  GREATER,        // >
  GREATER_EQUAL,  // >=
  ARITH_EQUAL,    // =:=
  ARITH_NOT_EQUAL,// =\=

  // Unification guards (precedence 700)
  UNIFY,          // =
  NOT_UNIFIABLE,  // \=
}
```

**Lexer Implementation**:
```dart
// In Lexer._scanToken():
case '<':
  addToken(_peek() == '=' ? LESS_EQUAL : LESS);
  if (_peek() == '=') _advance();
  break;
case '>':
  addToken(_peek() == '=' ? GREATER_EQUAL : GREATER);
  if (_peek() == '=') _advance();
  break;
case '=':
  if (_peek() == ':' && _peekNext() == '=') {
    _advance(); _advance();
    addToken(ARITH_EQUAL);  // =:=
  } else if (_peek() == '\\' && _peekNext() == '=') {
    _advance(); _advance();
    addToken(ARITH_NOT_EQUAL);  // =\=
  } else {
    addToken(UNIFY);  // =
  }
  break;
case '\\':
  if (_peek() == '=') {
    _advance();
    addToken(NOT_UNIFIABLE);  // \=
  } else {
    error("Unexpected character");
  }
  break;
```

### Operator Precedence (Extended)

```
1200  :- (rule separator)
1100  | (guard separator)
 700  < =< > >= =:= =\= = \= (comparison/test, non-associative)
 500  + - (additive, left-associative)
 400  * / mod (multiplicative, left-associative)
 200  - (unary minus, non-associative)
```

**Key property**: Comparison operators are **non-associative** (expressions like `X < Y < Z` are rejected).

### Parser Extension for Guard Expressions

Update `_parseGoalOrGuard()` to handle infix comparison syntax:

```dart
Goal _parseGoalOrGuard() {
  // Start parsing as term
  final left = _parseTerm();

  // Check for comparison operators
  if (_isComparisonOp(_current)) {
    final op = _advance();
    final right = _parseTerm();

    // Transform infix to prefix: X < Y → <(X, Y)
    return Atom(op.lexeme, [left, right]);
  }

  // Otherwise, it's a regular function-call guard
  return left as Atom;
}

bool _isComparisonOp(Token token) {
  return token.type == TokenType.LESS ||
         token.type == TokenType.LESS_EQUAL ||
         token.type == TokenType.GREATER ||
         token.type == TokenType.GREATER_EQUAL ||
         token.type == TokenType.ARITH_EQUAL ||
         token.type == TokenType.ARITH_NOT_EQUAL ||
         token.type == TokenType.UNIFY ||
         token.type == TokenType.NOT_UNIFIABLE;
}
```

### Transformation Examples

| Source Syntax      | AST Representation       | Guard Predicate |
|--------------------|--------------------------|-----------------|
| `X < Y`            | `Atom('<', [X, Y])`      | `guard_less`    |
| `X =< Y`           | `Atom('=<', [X, Y])`     | `guard_less_equal` |
| `X > Y`            | `Atom('>', [X, Y])`      | `guard_greater` |
| `X >= Y`           | `Atom('>=', [X, Y])`     | `guard_greater_equal` |
| `X =:= Y`          | `Atom('=:=', [X, Y])`    | `guard_arith_equal` |
| `X =\= Y`          | `Atom('=\\=', [X, Y])`   | `guard_arith_not_equal` |
| `X = Y`            | `Atom('=', [X, Y])`      | `guard_unify` |
| `X \= Y`           | `Atom('\\=', [X, Y])`    | `guard_not_unifiable` |

### Guard Examples

**Type Guards** (working):
```prolog
pred(X, Y) :- known(X), ground(Y) | body.
factorial(N, F) :- integer(N) | compute_fact(N?, F).
```

**Comparison Guards** (requires parser extension):
```prolog
% Quicksort with comparison guards
partition(Pivot, [], [], []).
partition(Pivot, [X | Xs?], [X | Smaller], Greater) :-
    X? < Pivot? |
    partition(Pivot?, Xs?, Smaller, Greater).
partition(Pivot, [X | Xs?], Smaller, [X | Greater]) :-
    X? >= Pivot? |
    partition(Pivot?, Xs?, Smaller, Greater).

% Arithmetic equality
equal_results(X, Y) :-
    X? =:= Y? |
    execute('write', ['Results are equal']).
```

**Unification Guards** (planned):
```prolog
% Unification without binding
unifiable(X, Y) :- X = Y | body.  % succeeds if X and Y can unify
different(X, Y) :- X \= Y | body. % succeeds if X and Y cannot unify
```

**Implementation Status**:
- ✅ Parser recognizes guard separator `|` correctly
- ✅ Parses predicates before `|` as `Guard` AST nodes
- ✅ Guard execution infrastructure (AST, codegen, runner) ready
- ⏳ Comparison operator tokens not yet in lexer
- ⏳ Infix syntax in guard position not yet parsed

**Required for Full Guard Support**:
1. Add comparison tokens to `token.dart` (see above)
2. Update lexer to recognize multi-character operators (`=<`, `>=`, `=:=`, `=\=`)
3. Extend `_parseGoalOrGuard()` to handle infix comparison syntax
4. Transform infix to prefix: `X < Y` → `Atom('<', [X, Y])`

### Three-Valued Semantics

Guards return one of three outcomes:
1. **Success**: Condition holds, continue with clause
2. **Suspend**: Unbound reader encountered, add to Si suspension set
3. **Fail**: Condition does not hold, try next clause

**Example**:
```prolog
safe_divide(X, Y, Z) :-
    number(X), number(Y), Y =\= 0 |  % guards ensure preconditions
    execute('evaluate', [X? / Y?, Z]).
```

If `Y` is unbound, the `number(Y)` guard suspends (adds Y's reader to Si).
If `Y` is bound to 0, the `Y =\= 0` guard fails (tries next clause).
If both guards succeed, execute proceeds safely.

## Examples

### Simple Arithmetic

**Source**:
```prolog
add(X, Y, Z) :- execute('evaluate', [X? + Y?, Z]).
```

**AST**:
```dart
Clause(
  head: Atom('add', [VarTerm('X'), VarTerm('Y'), VarTerm('Z')]),
  body: [
    Atom('execute', [
      ConstTerm('evaluate'),
      ListTerm([
        StructTerm('+', [
          VarTerm('X', isReader: true),
          VarTerm('Y', isReader: true)
        ]),
        VarTerm('Z', isReader: false)
      ])
    ])
  ]
)
```

### Complex Expression

**Source**:
```prolog
compute(X, Y, Z) :- execute('evaluate', [(X? + Y?) * 2, Z]).
```

**AST**:
```dart
StructTerm('*', [
  StructTerm('+', [
    VarTerm('X', isReader: true),
    VarTerm('Y', isReader: true)
  ]),
  ConstTerm(2)
])
```

### Unary Negation

**Source**:
```prolog
negate(X, Y) :- execute('evaluate', [-X?, Y]).
```

**AST**:
```dart
StructTerm('neg', [VarTerm('X', isReader: true)])
```

## Error Handling

### Lexer Errors

- **Unexpected character**: If `+`, `-`, `*`, `/` appear in invalid contexts
- **Invalid number**: Malformed numeric literals

### Parser Errors

- **Missing operand**: `X + ` (no right operand)
- **Mismatched parentheses**: `(X + Y`
- **Invalid primary**: `+ + X` (two consecutive operators)

### Runtime Errors

- **Type error**: Operand is non-integer (e.g., `3 + a` where `a` is atom)
- **Division by zero**: `X / 0`
- **Unbound reader**: Suspends goal, not an error

## Implementation Checklist

### Phase 1: Lexer
- [ ] Add PLUS, MINUS, STAR, SLASH tokens
- [ ] Add MOD keyword token
- [ ] Update `_scanToken()` switch statement
- [ ] Handle `-` in numeric vs operator context

### Phase 2: Parser
- [ ] Implement `parseExpression()` with precedence climbing
- [ ] Implement `parsePrimary()` for base cases
- [ ] Add precedence table for operators
- [ ] Integrate with term parsing
- [ ] Transform to prefix StructTerm

### Phase 3: Testing
- [ ] Test simple operations: `X + Y`, `X * Y`
- [ ] Test precedence: `X + Y * Z` = `+(X, *(Y, Z))`
- [ ] Test parentheses: `(X + Y) * Z` = `*(+(X, Y), Z)`
- [ ] Test unary minus: `-X` = `neg(X)`
- [ ] Test with readers: `X? + Y?`
- [ ] Test nested expressions: `(X + Y) * (Z - W)`

### Phase 4: Integration
- [ ] Run REPL test suite with arithmetic programs
- [ ] Verify `evaluate/2` receives correct prefix structures
- [ ] Test three-valued semantics (success/suspend/fail)
- [ ] Verify error messages are clear

## References

- **WAM Paper** (Section 8): Structure building and traversal
- **glp-bytecode-v216-complete.md**: Execute instruction and system predicates
- **Pratt Parsing**: [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operator-precedence_parser#Pratt_parsing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operator-precedence_parser#Pratt_parsing)

## Version History

- **v1.0 (2025-11-12)**: Initial specification for arithmetic expression parsing
